# Artist Statement

For my major project I did not interpret the theme “listening in/listening out” literally, with no sound or dialogue.  Instead, I examine the process of an artist, how they take various influences as input, and manage those influences as they output a piece of art.  I explore how artists make decisions based on external factors, such as critique or praise they receive and social pressure.  The process of an artist taking in various influences can be attributed to the “listening in” part of the theme.  The product or output an artist creates, derived from this process, can instead be attributed to the “listening out” part of the theme.  My work aims to highlight an anxiety many artists have as to whether their work will be understood by others, and the effect criticism or praise has on future creative decisions.

I place the user in the position of an artist, giving them a canvas they can use to create a simple piece from basic p5 functions.  They choose these functions, and how they are modified, by selecting 1 of 3 different options for each choice.  However, there is a section to the side of the screen which simulates a chat room. Various messages appear here, appearing as if real people were commenting on the piece of art the user is creating.  The sketch is presented as if the user were live streaming themselves creating a piece of art, with people watching and discussing what the user is doing (similar to the real-world streaming service called "Twitch").  These messages are authentic to how real people would comment, as they make opinions, interact with each other, and will occasionally get bored or go off topic.  However, the majority of messages depend on the context of how the canvas appears, and the choices the user is making.  They will discuss, critique and praise the decisions the user makes.

These dynamic chat messages may influence the user into making certain decisions.  If the user makes decisions the chat agrees with, it will become more friendly and give complements.  If the user does the opposite, it will become more aggressive and critical.  The user may feel pressured and driven to make certain decisions, and regret making decisions that are not in line with what the chat desires.  This represents a social influence and pressure artists often feel when making creative decisions, something they may "listen in" for.  While many of the choices the user makes when creating the canvas may seem simple and arbitrary, the dynamic reaction from the chat drives the user to be influenced.

Certain choices the user can make do not involve the canvas, and instead directly refer to the chat.  This puts the user in the position of having to choose whether to embrace the influence of the chat, or reject it.  For example, if the user picked the choice "make the chat larger", then they would be paying more attention to the chat.  These choices have a large impact on the mood of the chat.

Eventually, the user will be prompted to either delete the chat, or become the chat, depending on the mood of the chat.  The user deleting the chat is symbolic of a rejection of social influence, and instead shows that the user values their own intuition or originality.  In contrast, the user becoming part of the chat is symbolic of an acceptance of criticism or praise, and shows that the user can adapt to a social context.  These two endings relate to the theme by representing two different types of listening and taking influence.

I took inspiration from interactive titles such as The Stanley Parable (2013), The Beginner’s Guide (2015), Emily is Away (2015), Pony Island (2016) and The Hex (2018).  These titles explore the limits of interactive medium, the role of the player, and the meta role of the designer or artist.  Given that my experience was driven primarily by simple user choices, I took particular note of how these titles utilized both linear and branching narrative paths, and subverted the convention of these mechanics.

I structured my project as a branching narrative, directing the player towards two key endings.  Yet there is an element of randomness; at certain points the pool of choices is pseudo-randomly selected.  The chat messages themselves operate on a pseudo-random basis, as messages are selected from several context-based types at different priorities, in addition to variations on those types.  The experience also loops until certain events are triggered, so the duration of the experience varies.  This structure allows an intuitive and authentic experience to be delivered, yet with enough control needed to guide the user toward the theme.

Meta elements are particularly prominent in my project.  Someone interacting with my project is creating a piece of art through the choices they make, and that piece of art is critiqued by the dynamic chat messages.  At the same time, in a meta sense, the user is critiquing my project as a whole.  They are examining how authentic the behaviour of the chat is, the appearance of the project, how intuitive it feels, and so on.  In a sense, the user is as much of an artist as I am.  I do not hesitate to break the third wall and acknowledge this fact within my project, with several chat messages questioning their reality.  This allows for an exploration of what it means to be an artist, and supports themes of critique and influence.