# Interaction Statement

The typical experience should proceed as follows.  First the user will enter their username, load into the main scene of the sketch, and have their attention immediately drawn to the chat segment to the side as messages begin appearing.  They will notice the chat greeting them and feel inclined to respond.  Noticing the text box at the lower right, they will try entering a message, and notice the responses, informing them of its dynamic nature.  They will also notice the chat interacts with itself, and contains grammatical errors as if real people were typing messages, giving an authentic effect.

As further messages appear, some will begin to prompt the user to make a decision.  This directs the user to the primary canvas to the left and the interactive buttons below it.  The user will make a decision, notice an effect, and observe that they now have a new choice to make.  They may notice the chat commenting on their previous choice, either endorsing or rejecting what the user chose.  Messages will also appear which comment on the current decision being made, recommending that the user either should or should not make that decision.
As the user continues making choices, they will observe how the chat responds and reacts to the choices, and how future choices are commented on.  The user may also begin to notice how the overall ‘mood’ of the chat changes, becoming more friendly if choices are made which align with what the chat is endorsing, and less friendly otherwise.  The fluctuating viewer count below the chat may also be noticed by the user, and they may speculate what is influencing it.

Ultimately, the user will decide if they wish to pay close attention to the chat messages, and try to please them, or ignore it entirely.  If they follow the advice of the messages, the chat will become happier, and the viewer count will rise.  If the user does the opposite, the chat will become less constructive and more critical, and the viewer count will fall.  As more choices are made, some choices will appear that directly address the chat, and force the user into deciding whether they are going to take influence from the chat or disregard it.

Finally, once the viewer count (or chat happiness) reaches a certain threshold, an ending event will occur.  If the viewer count is too low, the user can delete the chat entirely, allowing them to ignore it fully and focus on their decisions.  If the viewer count is high enough, the user can ‘become’ the chat, immersing them within the chat and removing the canvas.  The user can continue interacting with the sketch indefinitely once either ending is reached, although no new events will be triggered.